in this video we are going to learn how to
search a node in a binary search tree
So here is an example of binary
search tree
And this is the function for searching a node in it So
searching in binary search tree is very simple because we
have this ordering in binary search trees That is the
elements which are smaller than the root will be to
the left side and larger than the root will be
to the right side
So we can use this very effectively to implement searching
For example if we have to search for an element
120 in this binary search Tree first we
will check the root is 100
So our search key 120 which is greater than
the root value will only reside in right side
we shall only check there
Then here the right child is 200 120 is less
than 200
So it can only be in the left sub tree
of 200 we will search like that so led
us see how this function works with an example
So we have the function search into which we pass
the root of the tree and the key to be
searched and it returns The search result true or false
So we have public Boolean search of node root comma
int key So we have this binary search tree here
and suppose we want to search for the key 60
So we call search by passing root and value 60 So
first we need to check if the tree is empty
If there are no elements in the tree then we
have to return false So we have if root equal
to null return false here root is not null so
This if will fail next we have to check if
root has the search key So we have if root
data equal to key if so return true as the
key is found But here root date is 100 Key
is 60 So this if will fail And now we
have to check whether the key is less than or
greater than the root If it is lesser key could
be present in the left Sub tree only so search
only there And if it is greater it could possibly
be in the right subtree So search in the right
subtree only So we have
If root data less than key and it fails
here since 100 is not less than 60 so it
cannot be Present in the right side So else part
will work
That is if the Key is present it will be
only present in the left sub tree So do the
same such operation in left sub tree So we can
call search function recursively by passing root left
and key So here first check if the tree is empty But
it is not so check if the root not holds
the key but again it fails
So check whether to goto left side or to the
right side So we have if root data less than key
And it is true since we have 50 less than
60 So we need to go to right side so call
insert by passing root right and key And here check
if it is empty But it is not so check
if it holds the data and see we have root
data equal to 60 and key equal to 60
So it returns true as the key found in the
tree
So that is how we can implement searching in binary
search tree now suppose The key passed was 500 So
as we just discussed first check whether the tree is
empty or not But here it is not so Next
check
If the root is holding the key again 100 it's
not equal to 500
So if will fail now we have to find whether
to go to Left side or right side So check if
root data is less than the key and 100 is
less than 500 So we need to go to right
side
So we have search of root right comma key again First
check if it is empty But it is not so
check If it holds the data But it is not
so again check whether to go to left side or
to right side So we have if root data less
than the key and it is true since 200 is
less than 500 So we have to go to right
side So call search by passing root right comma key And here
first check if it is empty But it is not
now check if root data is equal to key But
again it fails So next check Whether to go to left
side or to Right side
So we have if root data less than the key
And it is true since we have 300 less than
So we have to go to right side So call function
Search by passing root right and key Now we have root
Right Equal to null So here when we check If root
equal to null it returns true That is the tree is
empty so return false as the key is not found So
that is how we can search a node in a
binary search tree
So we will call the search function recursively in the path but the node can possibly present.